Who, I mean I don't have a real good game plan for how we start to show.
But in the, in the, in the spirit of the show,
maybe we should just drop into the that Radiolab staff meeting that we had.
Yeah, I remember it. It was a very a, it was the people that are like, um, what
can you put this next to us? Okay. So set it up.
Recently we came up with this challenge. Challenge. Yeah.
Two for the radio lab staff. We get everyone together
and an inappropriately stodgy conference room area.
Sort of dialing in from Wisconsin.
Alright, we're going to go the big reveal.
Everybody take a deep breath.
I had warned them ahead of time that something big was coming.
It's nothing obviously.
[inaudible]. Anyway, after we got over that little bump in the road, I just,
I basically outlined this, this challenge.
We came up with a little, a little plan to, which basically boils down to this.
On September 27th,
we're gonna release a story or a set of stories. Really, um,
I'm depleted today and that date you will have to pitch, report,
record produced said story,
you will have that much time to do it and we will be putting it up no matter
what.
We were giving them like a week to pitch this story and then a week to make it
right.
And you will have to do a story either about breaking news,
so something that just happened or you can do a story about pairs.
So I'm calling the whole thing, uh, bad news bears.
Yeah, I remember we've had bears sort of in the,
in the room so long and you know, I remember the,
I remember the tech in my memory store and tell me if I'm right,
it just happened over text was a text. Yeah. This is, this is one of those like,
uh, you know what you talking about princess and the Pea,
like there's a p to 14 mattresses down that just bothers you.
Like one of the ps that's been bothering me is, um,
the length of time it takes us to make these stories.
Sometimes I can feel too burdensome and we want it to just, uh,
like do an experiment where we shortcut the hell out of that. Just try to put,
it was just the strange juxtaposition scene. All right.
I want you guys to go out now and find something that is hot new and sudden and
just breaking like a real reporter or bears.
Right. That's such a weird, that's exactly,
it's like how are you going to cook that dish?
Here's a here, let me explain how it's gonna go then.
So you're going to get carried up. I'll give you those pairings in a second.
The story has to be under 10 minutes.
The story must at some point in it include audio from the movie, Bad news bears,
the original, the stories.
We might lose some point for recording from outside the office. Uh,
any aeration has to be done in conversation and have to be staring at somebody
across the glass and not going and tracks a little line. Uh,
before I do your teams, your parents, are there any questions?
How are we, how are we defining freaking news had a reasonable question.
I would give you a little bit like I would maybe be willing to accept something
from last week. Otherwise today forward.
Wow.
Yeah. Uh, why are we doing this?
[inaudible] guilty can be fun.
[inaudible] alright. Alright.
I'm Jen. I am Robert. Sorry. Sorry. I'm sorry. Okay.
This is Radiolab
today. Uh, we are breaking bad news bears.
Okay. So everybody went out from that meeting and again, the task was a,
to reiterate the breaking news story,
break news story or bears or bears week when week to do everything. Yeah.
You got to go out, you've got to get the tape, you've got to come back,
put it in the computer, cut it up at the music. Right. The thing,
we have eight producers for that Crepe, that check, check, check,
check and fact sheet producers means four teams.
So that means we end up in the grand total of four stories. Yes.
Starting who we started with. Yeah. How about Molly Webster and Simon out? Yeah.
Okay.
Well I will say that we have checked both boxes here.
We have a story that is both about bears and breaking news.
You're kidding.
Extra. You do get extra points,
so, all right, you there Matt? I am great. Last week we gave this guy a call.
Uh,
my name is Matt [inaudible] and I am the director of public works for the city
of Newburgh.
And you've got quite the task ahead of you, Huh?
Uh, yeah.
[inaudible] I can do some destruction.
Hurricane Florence is making landfall the devastating flooding and damaging
winds. We've had hurricane, hurricane Florence come through last week.
One of the hardest hit areas is Newburn in new Bern, new Bern, North Carolina.
This is a live look in Newburn as the water has really overtaken this.
There's relentless rain and wind. It's brought down trees.
If you've been watching the news at all over the past couple of weeks,
[inaudible]
probably seen Newburn on TV.
As you just heard,
it was one of the towns that was hardest hit by Hurricane Florence.
Homes were destroyed. Tens of millions of dollars of destruction.
Trees were knocked down
and with those trees have come power lines with the power lines down.
The lights go out. Thousands of people are in the dark
around here.
Yeah,
we talk about the flooding of Newburgh and we've got historic camps that were
built in the 70s that were pushed off the foundation.
Oh Wow. And as director of public works, it's, Matt's job
department is a charged to the cleanup days, you know,
not only the leaf and live the breeze, the trees and the shrubs, but also the,
you know, the construction debris from the houses that are being gutted.
And I'm actually at the disposal site right now,
looking at a line of about 30 tractor trailer trucks that are lined up and
getting ready to roll out. We'll start doing debris cleanup.
But, uh, well we called Matt about with the, uh,
the cleanup of something far smaller. Trust me, this,
there is not supposed to be here far less vital right now,
but I'm sure they'll get them back where they need to be soon,
but maybe just as important.
[inaudible]
let me, let me step back here and I'll give you a quick little history. Great.
Oh, so did he ever come in 1710.
Our downtown is a really beautiful six,
maybe eight square blocks where you see the beautiful porches.
This is local restaurant owner,
buddy Bengal, and our town was settled. I'm Swiss settlers.
And if you look up the meaning of Bern in Switzerland, earn means bear.
And so over the next 300 years they really ran with this
high school mascots. The bear,
they have the city flag that has a little black bear on it.
It's like that nod to their past right where they came from. But it's also,
they've got all these bears in the woods surrounding them.
Simon found out a lot of bit bears in the woods. Okay.
Largest black bear ever recorded from Craven County, North Carolina.
And the way this bear sort of obsession,
one of the ways it's taken hold is that they have bare statues all over town,
stay there, stand up on their hind legs.
There are about six foot tall or they're down on all fours that they're about
three foot tall work, probably somewhere between 60 or 80 of [inaudible] out.
Yeah.
So that being said, you know, bears are everywhere,
including the morning of September 14th, 2018
yeah,
hurricane,
hurricane Florence came in and by fountain midday water started to seriously
start rising again. Buddy Bangle.
We were up seven feet by Thursday night.
I mean it happened in some places just extremely quick
and so buddy and a few other locals who get upon ourselves that we needed to go
out and help people and they would go to areas outside of the downtown and they
were just banging on doors.
Say, look guys, in the next six to eight hours,
this water is going to be over your head and flood your apartment.
You need to get out now and get you a shelter.
Meanwhile, back in the downtown with with the waters continuing to rise
as close as we are to the river,
we received a eight 10 feet in our downtown area. This
strange thing started to happen.
Those giant bear statues that had for just been looking out over the town,
the rising floodwater actually managed to kick them up.
Yeah, they all sit on concrete slabs. But you know,
with the amount of water we've received, a lot of them floated.
Many of them were lifted cement and all, and we're just floating there,
standing upright, bobbing gently along.
No, a lot of them, a lot of them, that foot, very just they, they moved
down the downtown through the alleyways.
Um, some of us loaded just down the street.
Others floated on for blocks.
Oh my God.
Just closed your eyes here,
the hurricane season. And then astonishing leap
watched the parents go by
and then as the water recedes there gently set down and left there in these
still slightly flooded waters of the downtown.
Wow. That's a whole new view for him.
Photos of these bears started showing up sort of viral. Yeah,
yeah, yeah. He decided to travel.
Local residents started posting to social media and then,
so it was
Saturday morning.
It was the first day that the winds really had subsided and I was getting up to
just assess damage of everything that was outside. Yeah.
But he's at home. He wakes up in the morning,
he goes down the door of his apartment building,
he opens it up and it's just like
my God, this town has just been destroyed. I've got branches everywhere.
The rain is still lashing
and there was a lot of debris and stuff flying. And
when he looks just right in front of him, right outside the doorway,
right there
on its side and kind of a little bit of a puddle of water is a bear.
One of those floating bear statues had ended up at his apartment. Wow.
And he immediately recognizes it as the city hall.
Okay.
So you have on there a lot of the colors and scenes from the city of Newburn
that you have on their opposite. Yeah.
Back of the bear is painted yellow, like the new Bern flag.
The middle of the bear is painted with the North Carolina state flag and then
the shoulders and head of the bear are red, white and blue.
And that bear represents our entire city.
And there it was
right in front of my doors. Yup.
And a gentleman happened to just be walking by in the street.
Who was lived about a block block and a half away from me.
And he helped me pick the bear up. He
grabs the back, the other guy grabbed the front legs front back,
whichever they grab, they march it across this,
I'm presumed to be probably still six inches of water,
sort of washing through the street and,
and Florence is like not done right cause it's sat over the coast for a while.
So the winds have gone down, but like the rains were still torrential.
There was like, I mean, flood watches a week out. Yeah.
We were trying to figure out what to do with it.
And there's a Bush right behind city hall with a little bit of an alleyway in
between the Bush and the building.
So we put the bear in between there because we knew it would be hidden enough.
Yeah, buddy paid. Um, he took the bear back across city hall. It could,
could've been, had some bushes and then on, not
a few days later, they're actually getting ready for president Trump was going.
And so Matt Montaner, I was the director.
Head of public works goes down to city hall to like prepare it.
I was asked to go down there and make sure we had a flag on city hall and make
sure it was flying high. And why wouldn't remember we took a couple,
he and his team, they spot the bear, go over to it.
So two of us were, we'll pick it up very easily.
They pick up the bear, they march it to the platform.
Oh, set it back on the concrete pedestal like it was and then a bolter screw one
side of it into the bear's foot and then put the other side into the concrete
slab. And we actually did that on all four of the legs
and they step back and take a,
take a breath for a moment.
[inaudible]
and then they raise a new American flag and they move on.
Is he wiping a tear away? No, I'm just the GI.
But I know it's nice when you,
when you have something that represents your heart,
as odd as it may be to be a painted plasticine there image.
But still that's quilt. We're back. Oh,
we aren't over to quote man, this guy g you're still there.
[inaudible]
when you look at the grand scheme of it, bears
know it's not that important, but you know,
it kind of symbolizes that we're putting new bird back together.
We need, you need a symbol to get behind.
And our symbol in this city are the bears.
[inaudible]
that's one burned down alone. The Gov
wow. All right. So [inaudible] no bears. Bears.
Bears. So what's, uh,
that was number one [inaudible] story number. What's next? What's next? Oh,
we have, well, who is Pat Walters and Bethel Hab. And
what, uh, well remains remains to be seen. Let me do this. Should we,
should we talk about this thing? Yes. Talk about the thing. Okay. Yeah.
So this is a story about right park right here. Right behind it is Bob cat,
this guy named rob. Hi. Hello. Hey, really nice to meet you.
That's somebody should call that. Hey Fat.
And he's freaking rob is who exactly.
Uh, Rob Devin is a comedy writer. He worked in the city for a really long time,
like 10 years plus working for the Colbert report. Oh Wow.
Just basically like a high rise living city guy. Yeah.
But about a year and a half ago, he and his spouse, sandy moved upstate and,
great, I'll thank you. It's been rainy the last couple of days, but uh,
stuff is happening. Yeah.
They bought a little White House with a big yard and the Beautiful Mountain
Ridge in the distance,
but when it gets really rainy it gets super foggy and then it sort of
disappears. Yeah. The way that sometimes like a building would in Manhattan.
Yeah. You're relating things to building stone. That's all I got. Good does dog.
And pretty quickly after they get there,
they realize there's all this food growing in their yard.
They have apple trees and then they find a pear tree,
squash and Kale and Pumpkin Tompkins.
And how's the garden of Eden? Yeah.
Had you ever had trees that grew from fruit or food before? No.
And right in the center of this yard is the peach tree
and we had so many pieces.
I think we pulled like 200 off this tree and made jam and Pie and saw Sandy's
and amazing pie baker and so we had a ton of pie.
So the next,
the next year rolls around and Robin is like rubbing his hands together.
Like yes it's peach time,
you know that they're ready because they come off when you're gently tug at them
and if they are not coming off yet, they're not ready yet.
So it was in the part where we were like waiting and ready for it to start to
happen.
When he hears sandy yell from the back of the house,
Eh, it's a bear. So he jumps up,
goes to the back window and sees it was a bear. It was a, it was a,
I mean you can't mistaken sitting there sitting like Winnie the Pooh on its butt
and it was just reaching up.
I'm all lazy to the tree and it was pulling off a peach and it would like look
at it and we'll put it in its mouth.
Then it would drop a pit and then would reach up for another one.
It was just having the time of its life and I love that it's sitting.
Not only was it sitting, it's backwards to me,
which I found also very upsetting in ways that I couldn't totally articulate it
at a time. I was like,
you need to be more aware of the fact that you've come to someone's house taking
their food
and so he jumps up, he grabs this tambourine that he uses to punish his cat.
So I grabbed it and I ran outside and I started shaking it like one of them took
a video of it and then Sandy,
who's fast is like by the house, we'll thing like a dog.
Yeah
and like, oh no, the bear totally freaked out,
booked it back into the woods.
That way they walk up to the peach tree and the tree has been like massacred the
parts of this tree that are six feet or below.
We're pretty much stripped of peaches and there's just all these peach pits and
like half eaten peaches scattered around and every one of those is like a peach
that they're not going to have like a pie crumble that they're not going to
have. What was the feeling that you had
just, hi,
it's loss and an end determination?
I was like, no, I can't. I don't want this to keep happening at this point.
I see the pieces that are left and I would like them to be ours.
I think the bears had its fill and this has to stop now.
So they go back inside and rob immediately.
Google's like how to deter bears and then at some point they come across a
website that says the one thing that bears are very afraid of is human voices.
Yeah. So
like I think that what I need to do is make a giant playlist of podcasts and
play it.
A podcast. Yeah.
And so he takes this old iPhone with a broken screen and he begins to build this
spare deterring podcast device.
I have a telescope,
has a mechanical mount that I had one of those little power banks that you can
get to charge your phone when you travel and stuff.
And then a Bluetooth speaker that I connected directly to the phone
and he covers that whole thing with a recycling bin on top of these logs.
So he hooks the whole thing up and he loads it with the entire catalog of reply
all
from gimlet. Is there a bio and PJ Vogt and I'm Allen School.
Oh, this is a show about the internet. Oh my goodness.
Like the two most citified Brooklyn kids reply all is this podcast by these two
guys, PJ Vogt and Alex Goldman and a whole bunch of amazing producers.
Absolutely. An entire team of incredible people who produced the show.
But Anyway, yeah, rob just happens to like reply all.
It was something that we were comfortable with. Yes,
you can take this week. I love imagining PJ now,
Alex just talking to no guard.
So, uh,
mainly I'm just curious what you thought about your podcast being used as a
scarecrow. How do you feel about that Alex?
I thought like I thought it was great. Like I thought the only,
I thought that they were very limited ranges of application for this show.
I'd like for our show to be like the duct tape of podcasts.
You can do all kinds of stuff with it. Yeah.
So far we've only figured out the to listen to it scare barriers,
but you also start like there's one aspect of reply all that might be
particularly effective at scaring away a bear.
Just the last, the last one,
PJ's laugh. Just imagining a bear that was like,
I don't think it's people and I'm going to walk a little close to her.
I'm going to approach this tree. And then it was like,
oh that might be a little extra pop.
I do have the like I do mostly feel like I feel like I'm supposed to feel bad
about, but I mostly feel good about it.
Like I mostly feel good that it's just like useful.
It's useful in a very stupid way. Right. I'd like for her.
Well the terrible irony is here's the city boy who escaped the city Lynch,
the live with the peace and quiet and then as his peace and quiet invaded and
turns it back into a city. It's, yeah, I mean there, there,
there it's like Brooklyn just to kind of followed him up there.
Guy With the radio going on too loud. It was convertible.
I'm sure though it kind of felt reassuring to have that like going in the
background, you know that your bear deterring machine is doing its job.
It was an instinctual choice that I felt like continually revealed itself to be
the right one. Yeah, so he goes out, he checks that first morning,
the peaches are all safe, goes out in the evening, reply all,
continuing to play.
Hey Jean, Jean, how are you?
Next day he goes out and there's no sign of any bears and he gets like 10
peaches off the tree and then the next day no bears again.
But I don't feel the treat in my bones. The way you,
TJ and Alex are still talking about the Internet and there's like 20 peaches off
the tree. So over the days,
how many peaches did he capture from the Bayer? Well,
he had counted that the bear had eaten about 40 peaches based on the piss.
Yeah, yeah, yeah. So we had kind of counted in his rage, you know,
as he was cleaning up this, the mess,
how many peaches the bear had taken from him.
The way it shook out I got, we got about as many peaches as the bear did.
He thinks that he and sandy got like 40 pitches too. So like five,
10 Pepsi. Then he's thinking I win or at least I didn't lose. We tied.
And so anyway, he, he ends up writing this entire story on Twitter,
on Twitter. And I was like, this is a story of how,
what's happening in my yard right now. And if it got a big response,
and I was a little surprised,
I think at the number of people who took the bear side.
But I was like, well that's the problem.
Why can't the bear have some not enough pages for you? Like
bear apologists? Yeah.
Do they understand that there are other food sources then the one peach tree and
rob Dublin's yard like I clearly, no, no. Yeah.
The way I see it as like if rob had domesticated the bear raised it to only
understand that food gave from that tree and then sent it out into the woods,
they would be justified. But other than that, that's ridiculous.
I am not taking the bear [inaudible]. I am about like the morality
of it. It's just the bare doesn't like reply off broad does like reply all.
That's like very straight forward for me. Rob gets the peaches.
Do you think on any level the bear like got something out of listening to the
show? No. No.
I don't know. We just don't design it with bears in mind.
What would a show designed with bears in mind? Sound like
[inaudible] radio lab.
Oh my God.
Is that spin off radio lab for bears or bears? Yes.
We've been under sort of estimating the size of my bear audience.
Listen real talk here. Okay. Do we like bears? We like we, we,
we could do many more episodes. I go in particular,
we've run across so many in and they are staff is run across so many things
about bears that we've got. We've got a whole bear season.
We could do [inaudible] or we could lead to that.
We could just decide that right now. We could, we can make, could try again.
See if with anybody in the house who's going to do a non, yes, we are still,
we have two more. Okay. So next up, um,
is Matt Kielty and Rachel Q sick with breaking news. I hope we'll see.
Right. You just want us to go barreling men to this or something. Yeah, yeah.
Go. Okay. Well if we start all the way at the tip top,
we drove out to um, Oak Ridge, New Jersey. Yep.
Which is about an hour and a half west of the city here. Okay.
Drove out for a story about a bear. Surprisingly. Who would have thought good.
I've definitely heard dogs barking in the video. Oh. Oh, that's a dog.
But not just any bear. A famous bear. The most famous bear you could say. Yeah.
Hi. How's it going? My Name's Matt. I'm Rachel. We're reporters. Uh,
so we, um, we showed up totally unannounced at this house.
A woman answers the door. A little suspicious. We explain who we are. Hi Matt.
I'm Marissa. Then should we get her name? It's a Marissa. Marissa McCowen. Hi.
We need her husband Greg, who just gotten home from work. Rachel? Yes. Hi.
Nice to meet you. Nice to meet you as well. Nice to meet Ya.
So Greg walked us around in the backyard. It was really beautiful.
Where there's this huge forest. Yeah, this is gorgeous. And then
we try this. The kids are playing. Thanks so much. Let us into his basement.
Let's go in there. Oh, shut your door. Try to keep it more, somewhat isolated.
Okay, sure, sure. Okay. Oh, that sounds great. Church giving me two minutes. So,
um, yeah, I guess a, we were just curiously, I mean,
Marisa was telling us a little bit about the first time she saw the bear.
Like when, when did you, did she tell you about that? When did you first, yeah,
my wife saw him the first time I'd caught up just a glimpse of him. But uh,
at the time I videotaped it was actually the third time I saw him.
So it's the summer of 2014 it was a, it was a weekday. It was nighttime.
It was about six o'clock at night. So, and I was hanging out on my deck when,
Nope,
he sees this bear coming from the woods up towards the street, a black bear.
So I ran out, I grabbed my cell phone and just started videotaping with an old,
a Samsung note three. It's like a shaky video.
Greg started just like painting the phone all over the place to try to find it
with the [inaudible]
phone. Marissa's outside? Yeah,
it's another video. Oh, so she's taking the video too.
She's got a video of me taking a video of the bear. I don't see it.
So if you started
walking up his front yard, he's going down his driveway and he's looking,
he's still looking for this bear and really like you just see a little picture s
like slice of suburban America. It's just like some,
you see some trees of road green grass everywhere and then there it is.
There it is.
All of a sudden Gregg zooms in on this like Hillary blob that is moving across
his neighbor's driveway and at in screening.
But what you see is this black bear that is a bipedal bear walking on its hind
legs walking across the street like a human. Oh my God.
Wait, that's the bear. That's the bear.
So the bear is just straight up walking on two feet.
You could totally be like a kid in a bear suit. Like it's like, yeah.
Actually the first time I saw it I was like,
that is what my dad looks like when he stumbles out of the hallway in the middle
of the night without his glasses on. But still motoring. Yeah,
it's motoring and also sort of puttering. Puttering with purpose. Okay,
so gray, gray, gray, gray, gray, gray, gray. [inaudible]. Yeah.
Okay, so Greg's filming this whole thing. Yeah.
I'm over in the front yard of my house watching this walking bear,
but that's when I see him walk up my neighbor's driveway into the street walking
towards me.
I am walking backwards and the bears to the parents of crossing the street over
into another neighbor's front yard,
walk into the front yard right now and I'm somewhere off campus.
Marilyn
here, their neighbor.
Does she know that you're there?
You know that the bear, right?
Just look out man.
Yes. Okay.
[inaudible]
the video lasts for about three minutes and then
Greg stops recording.
So we got the video, we watched it go through the woods and stuff. I go inside,
I start giving the kids baths and stuff and I just take it and I want to share
it with some people. I throw it on Youtube, you know,
and a half hour later after an uploads,
I go and send out a couple of emails to like some friends and family.
Just be like, Hey, I saw this weird wild Beyer walking. I'm like,
check it out and that's it. Go to bed.
And then the next day
Greg
checks his phone and I start seeing my emails popping up again and again and
again and again. And it's people from viral media companies,
it's family members.
Somebody put it on Facebook and it was spreading on Facebook and yeah
know I was blown away.
But then all these other people start putting up videos because this bear is
being spotted all over town. Some of the videos are like of the bear,
awesome. Coming out at like nighttime or like dinnertime,
like walking in and out of the woods. Biggie walks back to the new dawn,
but there's also videos of this bear just like strolling down neighborhood
streets pop in his head into garbage cans, going through people's back yards.
It was like underneath this woman's deck. It was amazing.
He would come like right there, you know right there.
And the two of them were like 20 feet away. He looked up at me,
they made eye contact. Then the bear gets stolen.
There's a Piertri over there showed up across the street from this woman's
house. And we saw him one time, they're getting the pears out of the tree.
It was great to see him, you know, because he's so famous.
This spear is amazing. Everyone, he walks on two legs, eventually folks in town,
give him the name pedals, pedals from the word bike pedal.
He hit like Good Morning America,
Bonnie today walking tall and like all the national news,
a black bear walking on his leg. He walks on his hind leg.
[inaudible] agility and ease. Any human, completely upright like a human.
And everybody's just kinda like, oh my gosh. Like what a fun, cute,
adorable animal doing something that looks like a human. That's so fun.
Well, sort of everyone. No,
which is where we get to Lisa. Hi, I'm Maiko.
So basically we heard about Lisa,
she was like a big player in this whole like love affair with pedals.
So we go, we go inside, we sit down under dining room table. Okay. Like, wait,
when did you first learn of the bear? Um,
I don't remember the exact date. I know I even have a hard time with years,
but I think it was in 2014 that she was on Facebook.
I saw a post about this bear and he was in a video walking by and I was like,
oh my God, this is so sad. Like you didn't think it was like funnier. No,
I thought it was sad. Why does the video make her sad? Well,
so Lisa actually works in animal rescue and she explained that, you know,
so rather than being like, just in awe of it, like whoa. For her,
when she watched the video, what she saw was a bear that was injured. Yeah.
So the thing is that if you look at some screenshots of pedals close up,
you'll see he really had no hands. One was like amputated.
I was like a stub. It was like pretty much missing.
And the other one was just broken, mangled.
And Lisa said that's why he walked on his hind legs. I mean,
I'm sure he ate whatever berries or whatever he could get.
But Lisa said it was probably because he couldn't use his paws is why he was
walking around these neighborhoods because he was starving and he couldn't feed
himself. And so her first thought was, we have to help this bear.
So she gets in touch with a couple of women, they start a go fund me campaign,
Help Save pedals,
raised $25,000 in like four days to basically dart him,
transport them and house them at this place called the wildlife orphanage.
There's a couple other wild bears there,
couple of team like retired circus bears, if you will. There's a pond,
a lot of trees and it's private, you know, it's not a zoo.
So the very last thing they had to do was petition the state of New Jersey to
just, you know,
like do it because that's against the law for us to just start a bear and put
him in a truck and take them.
So they get this petition going and ends up going like around the world,
like 400,000 signatures. Yeah, they send it off to the state.
We're all ready to go. Everything was in place. And the state says,
no, we're not doing that really well.
So I got in touch with the press people at j d, e p,
which is like the Environmental Department of New Jersey.
And basically they said, we have no interest in commenting on this.
Why would they not even comment?
Well I think you can understand that if you know the rest of the story of
pedals. Yeah, there's a lot more to this story that you don't know. All right,
let's hear the rest then. Um,
okay. Well,
so what you basically have is you have a collision of two ideas about black
bears and what they are and what they need.
Okay. So that's John Wellum at large with the New York Times magazine.
Longtime pedals fan.
Yeah. More. Um, I knew more about as earlier work, like before he got famous,
he's written a lot about animals, including petals and,
and John explained to us that what you had was this divide where on the one side
you had people like Lisa, who when they looked at the bear,
they thought that their needed help. It's injured, seems to be struggling.
We got to get it out there. But on the other side,
you have the state of New Jersey.
And they came at it from a completely different viewpoint where they,
uh, you know,
were just as interested in quote unquote helping the bear and making sure that
the bear could, you know, uh, live, it's, I don't know,
best life I suppose you'd say. And uh,
but they wanted to go about it in a very different way as far as they were
concerned. It wasn't, it was a wild animal. Uh, and you,
you don't take a wild animal out of the wild unless absolutely necessary.
And the fact that you saw this, Bayer walking on two legs,
they basically saw the bipedal bear is a real survivor.
This is like a feat of evolution. Like this bear evolved to survive.
We should just let him do his thing. He was still out there being a bear.
So we're to leave the bear there.
Hmm. It's the right thing to do. So this is, uh,
this is the part of the story about pedals that we, we haven't told you yet. Um,
so pedals was first found in 2014 for showed up,
showed up again the next summer, and then showed up even 16. Yeah,
even early 2016 there are videos of pedals and then nothing,
and then a bear that had become a national sensation is dead.
The bear known as pedals. So in October of 2016,
news broke that pedals had been killed.
Kale during a bear hunt on Monday we told you about in the annual bear hunt that
takes place in New Jersey in pretty quick a familiar story.
It's played out growing outrageous mourning over the apparent killing of a
famous black bear. There was anger, protest,
death threats against whoever may have killed the bear hit piece of shit.
Death threats against an innocent hunter against himself. His family,
people have actually threatened to burn down his business there people posted
photos of his home, his wife's name. In the midst of all of this,
I think everybody out there should be going after the state of New Jersey.
People were angry at the state,
state in New Jersey did nothing about the bear. Where were the DPA? When people,
where did this therapy injured for years that this is their fault?
Where were they then?
That was so rough.
Yeah. Yeah.
I had my moment, you know,
but people sent me bear things, you know, like I have,
I have like the little sea, the bear on top of the radio.
And Sabrina got me a picture that looked just like pedals from UN beautiful,
um, artists that doesn't even know pedals,
but made this picture of a bear that looks just like I'm and just cool.
And so she gave me one of though, you know, it's just nice. People thought,
you know, they saw how hard we fought.
Yeah.
Yeah. But the book is the best. It really is. And what's the writer's name?
John Malala. Yeah, I talked to him. He was nice. Nice guy. Yeah,
I remember being like, you want to what?
So John Actually wrote an obituary for pedals.
You have a copy of the magazine, but yeah. That's cool.
That's just look really quick.
And then you guys can use for the New York Times magazine's annual lives.
They lived issue. Yeah. Got It.
I just, I just thought, you know, the way I've always, you know, I,
I've always thought of like the lies they lived, the Bowie picture, you know,
it's about these people's lives. So many people, but it's also just,
um, and you're just thing where you talk about the world that we live in.
Janet Reno pedals the man there's pedals.
One reason why I find conversations about animals so interesting is because the
animals always have no right that there you basically have groups of human
beings
[inaudible] standing around this like a little screenshot object at pedal
standing. Yeah.
Uh, trying to, uh, figure out what to do with it,
walking towards a mailbox, just fetching the mail. Yeah.
And this is actually the picture that I used on his,
our version of like rest in peace pedals for like a memorial page. Yeah.
Yeah.
Um, yeah. I don't know. I mean, do you want me to, I felt like, uh,
do you want me just to read the end of the pieces, but yeah. Yeah,
that'd be great. Okay. You guys impossible to know the circumstances,
whether the hunter knew the bears identity before he or she fired whether pedals
who did spend some time on all fours had been distinguishable from an ordinary
bear,
whether he had been standing upright in the wilderness looking preposterous and
conspicuous and conspicuously like himself. That is the bear's posture.
The very proof of his resilience might've marked him for death.
It was never clear what we owed. Pedals. Exactly.
You could argue that allowing pedals to live in the woods and be hunted like any
other bear with an active respect of validation of his wildness.
You could also argue that it was a cruise in laps of human compassion pedals
stood for something. We may never agree what it was.
[inaudible]
so wait, do you guys even have, did you, there wasn't a clip in there,
you didn't use a clip from the movie. Do you have a clip from the movie? Well,
a matter of fact, we do a, yeah,
we got a clip or does this, where did you send that thing again?
It's in the selects. Alright. Okay, fine. Uh, he, um,
we call a full shit on your stupid rules.
Play it again, Bull Shit. And yet in doing so,
you followed it. That's right. That's the beauty of it. Yeah.
All right. You know what we're going to do?
We're going to take a little break or we're going to clear the air.
We're going to come back with a couple of producers who, uh,
who have a little bit more respect for the rules more in a moment.
Hi, this is Jason Studstill calling from Seattle, Washington.
Radiolab is supported in part by the Alfred p Sloan Foundation,
enhancing public understanding of science and technology in the modern world.
More information aboutSloan@wwwdotsloan.org.
Hey, it's Chad. I boom.
Rod this season a more perfect from wny c studios might be the most perfect yet
19th amendment women have been fighting for the legal right to vote since the
1840. This season we are making an album featuring, for example, Dolly Parton,
an album of songs and stories inspired by the amendments to the u s
constitution.
Listen to more wherever you get your
podcasts.
Jad, Robert Radiolab breaking bad news bears. And uh,
we've had three bear stories so far and maybe I, you know,
maybe this is the moment when I should admit that everybody broke for bears.
Yeah. That was, I could see that coming choice,
you know, and you woke up in the morning full of vim and vigor and excitement.
What did you do the hard news or would you right away these days,
would you do the bad news or really true like, well,
what I was hoping actually and I was that,
I mean admittedly Molly and Simon's had a little bit of like the hurricane and
just come in.
But what I was really hoping was that somebody was going to get a solid rock
solid breaking news about bears kind of thing.
And I actually had one in my sights that I was just sitting on waiting to see if
anybody got it. So a, something that the Trump administration did though, uh,
most people don't know,
actually the seeds of it were planted during the Obama administration was that
the grizzly bears came off the endangered species that they were do list.
And in the wake of that,
there was about to be for the first time in almost 50 years,
a hunt around Yellowstone because the grizzlies have gone from like,
you know, whatever it was a hundred left to now around 700.
They've also started encroaching on hikers, campers, hunters and ranchers.
And so the idea is that once you do list them, which should be a success, hey,
they came back, we can to list them now, but also at the same time,
that means that we can start and call them or shoot them. Yeah.
So the ranchers are geared up to get their licenses and head out there and have
this hunt. And at the last moment, uh, there was a court case and a judge said,
no, no, not time to do the hunt. And that happened a couple of weeks ago.
And then that just add hunting season five days before the hunt or whatever it
was. And what was the reasoning from the judge? It was a, I mean,
I think clearly like some activists had come to them and said,
they're not yet ready. This will damage the population. And so, yeah,
the judge had kind of like that maybe that the administration hadn't shown
enough recovery to warrant hunting and,
but that then just two days ago that that ruling got sort of like either
confirmed or upheld or whatever it is.
And now that functionally actually means that the grizzly is not delisted, um,
that it is still on the endangered species list.
And there's even some among bear concerned folk you talked to their,
they're not quite sure what to think because if you're going to have an
endangered species list, you need to occasionally have an animal come off of it.
Hey, you need a win, you need a win.
Otherwise you just lose the political will to even, yeah, totally do it. Or,
or you just show that doing it is pointless and you're going to lose them
eventually. So you don't even never get off. Right.
Know that you need someone to get off. And I guess, you know,
you could probably go back and forth for a lot about whether it's time for the
Yellowstone grizzlies to be off or not, but um, yeah, so nobody got to that.
But, um,
but still we have one more story and it comes from any Macewan and lots of
Nasser. Of course. It's about bears. I think in some ways, both really.
This is another, it's another,
it's not breaking news in the sense that it's recent, but it's breaking news
and that we're saying stuff that is true about the world that has not been
reported before. Oh, so it's breaking news about there's,
yeah, I think so. Okay. Where, where do you start?
We start in the far north in the Arctic islands in Canada.
Cold this winter. You have to place, you can imagine
with an Inu and hunter. Oh, right. Named David Qube Tanner.
I was born in new Cocteau in Igloo in April, 1359.
And I live in a small community of 470 people and everybody knows everybody
pretty well related.
Anyway,
he told us this story of a hunt that he was on that was unlike any hunt he had
ever been on before,
where he caught a bear that was unlike any bear he had ever seen before. Wow.
What happened? What? April, 2010
me and [inaudible] hunting Burgers, a nice morning shaft. No on top.
Nice weather.
He and his wife set out on their skidoos I'm into is a snowmobile.
It's just what they're called up there. Yeah.
Just sort of like the snow machines that you can, just a mechanical device.
Yeah. Um, they hop in their skidoos they head out across the sea ice.
Um, and they're heading towards this island that,
that are playing in camping in this empty cabin.
And we got to the cabin and we're going to camp there.
But the cabin was damaged by some bears.
Wow. They knew that immediately. Yeah.
And then they decided let's go back to another cabin. Okay.
[inaudible] t and fueled up and everything was third heading back or four
o'clock in the afternoon. And as we're following the court,
getting court to a cabin, there was a hill, um,
equities of tracks coming down, down truck cabins,
fresh bear tracks around this cabin. It will not take the 400 going forward.
And Honeywell coming back there. We're there. And as they approach it,
they see that this cabin is also been ransack.
The bear has gone in a mattress. He broke the window. K ,
well we'll continue on and you run into another cabin.
So this is a third cabin they pass. Wow. Roped the door open later message said,
is it normal for a polar bear to go into cabinets and throw mattresses out?
Not Oliver. Don't really do that. So we start tracking it again.
We could shoot a truck, Holloway.
And at this point they start getting a little worried because these tracks are
coming toward the community, to your tech going fast.
A fourth cabin ransacked and a fifth Jesus also been through and right next to
the fifth there is a six cabin.
I noticed it wasn't that open. So I brought it to cartridge cap. Yeah.
Oh, so the, this is this presumably the next destination for the bear. Right.
So I went a little further that going around it and sure enough,
this bear was hiding. It has a cabin. He had his hedge out,
his troop, just body and his
so
chasing it
that got kind of coated establish you.
I earn from my rifle on the sleds back on my hair or just leg standing up,
you know?
And why were, why were you afraid? I don't know.
I just never run into that 10 of bed before she was used to polar Paris.
But this bear, he just had this feeling that it was different.
Something was off. But I take a shot at it,
I hit it.
He kills the bear. He does. Okay.
[inaudible] they approach it on their skidoos they get off.
This bear looks strange. Hmm.
It's a blonde bear.
I just thought your Tisha ordinary grizzly bear,
cause I never once you catch a grizzly bear before and that was my first time
and the legs are dark shirt, just let it got boots, shiny drawers,
socks or whatever.
He also has dark circles around his eyes. Wow. Interesting.
So he takes it back to town and he checks in with this government officer and
this guy takes a look at it and he's like, yeah,
David, I think this might not be a polar bear. It might not be a grizzly bear.
It might be a hybrid bear.
A hybrid bear. Yeah. Like bow a little bit of both. Little bit of both.
And David had never even heard of that before.
I have never actually heard of that. It's not a common thing that happens.
But a few years before David's bare, right?
Extremely rare creature is shot and killed in the Canadian Arctic.
First one ever was caught in [inaudible].
Have you ever heard of a grower, a grizzly, polar bear hybrid,
and the media is the best.
David Attenborough included two polar bears and brown bears into breeding.
Got Really excited about it.
So we've known for a while that it's happening out there. Wow.
And even David has encountered a few more out there in the wild.
I run into a mother polar bear with two little teddy bear cup Caprisa hybrid.
So cute.
So this is some kind of crossbreeding between these two species. But the,
the crazy twist was when, when this Guy David Coop Tonah uh, shot this thing,
it w uh, this particular Paisley Barry sent it off for genetic testing.
They told me it's called the first second generation bear.
Their mother was half Oliver,
half grizzly and the father was a full gross to me
bare the David shot is the first indication that these bears are fertile.
No Way.
Which is something that you wouldn't think of a horse and a donkey say wood
would breed together, make a mule.
Those mules can't then have offspring will be, I thought that too
different speeds. Cause you're different species, right.
These are different species.
They branch off evolutionarily like hundreds of thousands of years.
Pretty much the same time that we broke off from the neanderthals.
And so it'd be like us meeting in the Anatole out in the, you know,
the crown heights bar or something and going home with that person and creating,
creating an awesome, this
is a really specific, it sounds like you've had
Franklin f April 10 call me.
Wow.
That's so they branch to the Polos and the grizzlies branch at the same time as
us in the neanderthals or around a ballpark. I mean, all these are ranges.
So just goes to show how far apart they actually out. So, okay.
So I thought that that's not, that doesn't work. Well,
it kind of shouldn't work. But wildlife manager,
Marcia Branigan says, oh, it sorta does.
That's kind of against the biological terminology that we use for species.
Oh, they're breaking the rules, breaking the rules, the rules we made, right?
The number of polar and grizzly bear hybrids has been growing over the last few
years. It's evolution in action. We're seeing it take place before our eyes.
Bear might not be considered a rare creature for too long.
And this sort of general idea about this whole new species is it is linked to
the changing climate because now these two species are overlapping.
Hotter temperatures are moving Alaska and Canada's grizzly bears north of all
polar bears are losing much of their ice and spending more time on land.
So for instance, the polar bears have hair covering the bottom of their feet.
Grizzly bears do not. Um, but then heads, they have pads. Yeah. But then the,
or bears has like partial hair covering.
So like maybe you get the best of both worlds, you know, grip or whatever.
But also you're, you're warm. Oh.
So it's a good thing to be one of these half, right. Hybrid Vigor,
best of both worlds kind of thing. This is the new bearings.
Oh yeah.
So this isn't it bells on knocked bizarre Frankenstein night creatures.
They are valuable new hybrids there may become increasingly common.
So that's, that's kind of like an,
and that's the story we got interested in and that's the story that has been
reported.
But then last year this paper came out and it kind of completely changes the
story. And are we at the place where you're, where the um,
the bear's become breaking news? Yeah,
I actually think it's even more interesting than that first story. It's way,
way weirder. It could more dramatically play out like on an HBO miniseries.
Okay. Lay It on me. So last year a paper came out and that scientists,
we talked to you,
Marcia Branigan is one of his coauthors and what they did is they basically made
a big giant list of every citing of a hybrid bear and of all the genetic
analysis of like every time we've seen this happen in the wild and all the
information we could possibly glean from that.
And what you found was that every single one of these hybrids can be traced back
to
one female polar bear,
one single bear named bear,
one zero nine six zero
will be a scientist with the of her that she is,
she is literally the mother of all hybrid bears in the wild. Wow.
So there's something about this polar bear that seemed to attract grizzly
gentleman
or she was just interested in Grizzly gentlemen. Wow.
We mostly just have kind of guesses of how it went down since there were no
witness.
This is Elisa McCall, she's a staff scientist at polar bears international.
But what we think could have happened is that there was this female polar bear,
and maybe she did have some, you know,
interesting personal preference for Brown bears or maybe it was simply that she
was an estrus and a male. She was there, she was basically in heat.
So she's giving off a sense that she wants to mate. Okay.
They leave these stinky foot trails and so males will follow them on the ice.
What are those smell like? Oh my gosh. You know, I've never smelled that,
but I know to a male polar bear, they smelled good. That's all I know. Um,
but as the female puts down the smelly footprints, the males are like, oh yeah.
And they'll follow her for you know, days and it's cute.
They'll actually put their feet right in the footprints. They follow her way.
Yeah. So maybe there was just this really aggressive brown bear,
grizzly bear male who followed the female tracks and could have fought off other
polar bear males.
Maybe this is a case of, of like, like nonconsensual,
but if you look at sort of like the genetic analysis, it looks like
Maynard with two different grizzly bears.
She had babies with two different grizzly bears and with one of them she had
babies years apart. Oh. So she's had three litters with, with, with,
with two different grizzly bears. Interesting.
And all the offspring are from those three non hybrid barriers.
So this is narrowing in scope really quickly.
Yeah. It's not like, oh this is this. Yeah. This like species wide,
you know, new adaptation. It's just like,
here's this one lady who has this one kink,
strange place. And then I guess, but
right. It also,
there is a possibility that it's like those were just the only dudes around.
Yeah. But
I was thinking like, oh my God, maybe this bear is a genius.
And she's seeing this like ice change around her and she's saying like,
I need to save my DNA.
And the best way to do it is to put it with a grizzly cause they're doing better
than I am. That's hilarious. I mean, yeah.
Imagine that there's thought, hey, that would be pretty good.
Unfortunately, the hybrids were kind of a mess, to be honest.
They weren't really well suited for land or for ice.
They were such an in between bear, um,
that they really just weren't that fit.
And really grizzly bears are so well adapted to life on land and finding food.
You've got the big comp, they've got the big wide head.
They've got these long claws for digging.
They don't have for on the pads of their feet because they don't need it. Right.
Polar bears are so well adapted for the ice. They've got a much smoother,
sleeker head that helps them get in and out of seal holes. They've got thicker,
sharper claws to grab seals and help them walk on the ice.
There for is hollow a which helps trap warm air against their bodies in the
hybrid. They're like this weird in between. So their head is kind of like,
not really sleek, but not really boxy. Kind of this weird in between.
They don't really blend in that well with the ice or with the land,
cause they're kind of this creamy color. Right. And then there for itself,
depending on where the is on the body is like a mix of hollow but not hollow
like, so yeah, it backfired on her if that was her marathon.
But I like that idea.
So these Peasley bears are just probably not the new horizon of the bear that
will be a, and actually on top of that.
So, so, okay. So if you're imagining the family tree, right?
So there's a mama polar bear, uh,
with these two grizzly bears at different times. Right. Okay. So there's the,
let's say the dad and the Stepdad, one of the kids, a daughter,
and she's the only one who's had kids herself.
So the third generation came from her,
but it turns out that all those third generation bears, including the bear,
the David Katana shot, um, that bear, the,
the daughter bear he made with her father.
Wait, there's some sort of incest part to this.
Okay. Yeah.
Oh, that's so weird.
[inaudible] with the other barrier that
Kinda like dated the Stepdad sort of thing? Yeah. Sort of. Yeah.
She slept with the same two dudes that are, mom did. Oh my gosh.
Now we're going from HBO to like Shakespeare. Yeah.
Or like Greek tragedy or something.
That's a weird family tree. It's healed.
Now all of a sudden it looks less like a species wide movement for life.
We'll find a way and it looks a little more like this is one crazy interbred.
Wow. So what do you make of that?
Maybe this one like crazy inbred family is the first, you know,
quite awkward attempt at what may become like, you know,
might be like evolution striving forward and making shaky step after shaky
steps. Nature is run
cheat. It's not like pretty the way you expected. It's Rhonchi because sex like,
like animals try things. It's like this could,
maybe this is gonna keep going, but, but only time will tell.
There's no way for us to know.
And one last thing, uh, which is kind of an afterthought, but, but maybe not.
Uh, because while it's not clear whether our polar bear family is,
is an awkward evolutionary step forward or just just playing freaky,
uh,
what we do know is that nature is not exactly shy when it comes to being
sexually creative. Is this seven path. Yes.
So it turns out at the Museum of sex,
they have this exhibit called the the sex lives of animals.
And my brother was coming into [inaudible].
People aren't shy with the horns and we thought incest is themes.
Send both of them.
I'm glad you went there because my mind went there and I was like, whoa.
I sort of organized this before I learned about the incest thing,
but it's just this or you know.
But then it just made it all that more uncomfortable. But anyway. Okay,
let's go. You also didn't know about any of this going in, so he poor guy. Yeah.
Are we here? Really? But we,
we got got into that room and a very nice woman named Stephanie Spicer showed us
around and we learned just like nature is trying some crazy stuff.
Give me a, give me like a, like a listicle. Have sex through there.
Blow holes. Whoa. I guess why not? I'm tortoises have a crazy tongue.
Penis. Whoa. That comes out of nowhere.
That's like somebody from alien ducks have sex with each other while they're
dead somehow. Oh dear. Have threesomes. Um,
there's all kinds of butts stuff. What is that? Is that, I don't know.
And actually at one point we were sort of surrounded by clitorises and other
things.
I am starting to feel like I've been in a row and I'm feeling a little queasy
and then we're like, they need like an obstinance room for brothers, sisters,
just like, we just need a minute. Can we have a minute?
Where's the celibate space?
And then we got free passes to the booby bouncy castle. And I was like,
Jimmy got into it. And so we do. And he's like, Oh God,
I've just sent pictures to my parents and they're just like
Canada
left.
That's wonderful. That's how you end up bear show right there. Yes.
Every bear show and Venice x museum, I think. I did not find that coming.
Enemy Q and lots of Nasser. Andy's brother Jim. Is it Jim? Yes, Jim, real quick.
Special. Thanks. Um, uh, thanks to windy card. Thanks to key wild for these,
for the song bears on performed by Kiet wild and Mr. Clark,
thanks to you phonics quartet for their song,
which accompanied pedals and his rise to fame song was called Fantasy Movement
for very fast and manic and it was off their album,
nuclear breakfast and Stephanie Spicer at the Museum of sex.
And also of course bear one zero nine six zero. And thank you. So firstly,
just stepping through this whole school idea into the hopper and come out with
the, with what we came up with, he just kinda crazy. Yeah, yeah, yeah.
And you go hibernate. You go, hibernate. Yes. We'll say goodbye. I'm Chad. Go.
I'm Ryan. I'm Robert Krulwich. Sorry. And I'm Soren Wheeler.
Thanks for listening.